(Version française plus bas)

I discovered this [pre-print](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.11581) by listening to the excellent interview of its first and last authors, Akarsh Kumar and Kenneth Stanley respectively, on the Machine Learning Street Talk [podcast](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KKUKikuV58o). Kenneth Stanley is a well-known AI researcher who has written, with Joel Lehman, another author of this pre-print, a [book](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Why-Greatness-Cannot-Planned-Objective/dp/3319155237?&linkCode=sl1&tag=mlst00-21&linkId=ef6366154109faa363e3d902197160ca&language=en_GB&ref_=as_li_ss_tl) titled "Why Greatness cannot be Planned" that apparently introduces many of the ideas presented in this paper.

The central claim of this paper is that there exists a potential disconnect between an AI model's performance, its ability to reach a benchmark, and the internal representations which are commonly assumed to underlie this ability. In particular, as AI models improve thanks to increased training data and compute, it is tempting to believe that key to this improvement is a parallel improvement in representations, a belief the authors dubb *representational optimism*. This is probably an anthropomorphic bias as introspection, for what it's worth, tells us that it is by better grasping appropriate concepts, better analysing problems, that we improve on cognitive tasks. This begs the question of what makes a representation "*better*" than another, and the authors provide an comprehensive answer: Representations, or concepts, are better if they are modular, non-overlapping, and meaningful. By contrast, an increasing number of studies suggest that modern models do not in fact rely on such ideal representations but rather on heuristics which are redundant and correspond to fractured concepts. For instance, the ability to add may not depend on a clearly separate concept, but rather on disconnected and redundant mechanisms, so that, for example, adding fruit relies on different circuitry than adding staplery objects. This example also highlights another undesirable aspect of these representations, instead of being modular, they are entangled, ideally the ability to add should not be affected by what objects are being added. Based on these two characteristics, these subpar representations are called here *Fractured Entangled Representations* (FER) and are opposed to ideal *Unified Factored Representations*(UFR). 

To illustrate the difference between FER and UFR and their presence in deep learning models, the authors use an image rendering Neural Network called CPPN (Compositioal Pattern Producing Network) which takes as input the x and y coordinates of each pixel and its distance from the centre of the image, to return a colour vector for that same position. To properly appreciate the analogy the authors are making, it is important to understand that these neural networks generate a single image once its parameters are fixed (contrary to text-to-image generators), so you can think of all the pixel positions as the entire space of potential queries you could test a model with so that studying these models grants the authors a holistic and complete picture of the model's computations. In addition, this means the output of every single neuron for every pixel position is itself an image making it very easy to see precisely what each neuron contributes to the final outcome, and these intermediary images constitute internal representations which are immediately available, contrary to the intractably complex representations of neurons in most AI models. The images are obtained in two different ways. The first source of images is Picbreeder which was a website where humans took part in the evolution of CPPNs by iteratively selecting images which were used as parents for the next generation of images. Importantly, the participants were not given any particular goal, they simply chose whichever images they liked. The second group of CPPNs was obtained by using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to train a multi-layer perceptron from scratch to reproduce a Picbreeder output.

The authors present three examples of images, a skull-like picture in the main text, and a butterfly and an apple which are in the supplementary material. Looking at both the original Picbreeder and the new SGD-obtained version of each picture, the latter looks like a perfect copy, in an analogous way that an LLM may generate text in a humanly convincing way. On the other hand, when the researchers exploit the fact that every neuron in the network generates its own representation in the form of an image, they find very different structures between the two CPPNs. The Picbreeder version is quite parsimonious, using just 24 unique representations to generate the skull picture (some neurons in downstream layers are simply reproducing upstream representations identically, an artefact due to layerisation which allows the comparison of the original CPPN which has a complex architecture depending on the history of its evolution with the more standardised multi-layer perceptron optimised using SGD). Furthermore, these representations can be described as factored or modular with different neurons representing meaningful features (such as symmetry along the y-axis) that are represented separately (for instance, one neuron represents the overall skull shape, while another corresponds to the eyes, and another to the mouth). Another quality of these representations is that they can be manipulated separately without affecting other aspects of the picture, by adjusting individual weeights connecting neurons. For instance, in the case of the skulls, the authors find four connection weights that control the opening of the mouth, winking of the eyes (left and right separately), eye width, and width of the jaw. Similarly, in the butterfly and apple examples that feature un the supplementary, they identify single weights which uniqueely control the size of the wings or the angle of the stem. These qualities of parsimony, meaningfulness and modularity of representations, bear all the hallmarks of aforementioned Unified Factored Representations. 

By contrast, the intermediate images, or representations, of the skull picture obtained through SGD are far less organised, with a much greater number of distinct representations used to obtain the skull picture, and with no obviously meaningful representation encoded by any neuron, the generation of the overall skull depends on each representation compensating for some aspects of the others. Indeed, when carrying out parameter sweeps to find connection weights that control precise features in the image as before, the authors are unable to find any such clean control, the skull quickly blurring whenever one of the weights is tweaked. In the apple example, they were able to find a weight that controlled apple size, but this also affects the colour of the stem, capturing what the authors describe as entanglement of representations. These repreesentations can thus be qualified as FER, and the important thing to stress here, is that in spite of this poorer set of representations, the final skull picture is indeed identical to the original Picbreeder version, illustrating how an AI model can, at a superficial level, demonstrate excellent performance, while having very poor representations under the surface.

Why do the representations used by these two models differ so drastically? As it has been briefly alluded, there are certain unique specificities of CPPNs, namely in their architecturee with neurons taking shortcuts across downstream layers for instance and in their activation functons which are potentially of different kinds between neurons in the same network, but the authors believe these are mitigated by their linearised versions of the original picture which turn them into MLPs, so that the only crucial difference that remains lies in the way these neural networks evolve. Picbreeder images, as previously said, are not trained to produce a particular pattern; instead, they are the result of multiple selection rounds by humans who choose pictures on purely subjective grounds. This is evident when tracing the phylogeny of these pictures: instead of a direct route to the skull, apple, or butterfly image, Picbreeder users explored the space of possible images in an open-ended, diverging manner. Contrary to this, the copied images were obtained by directly targeting the desired final image using SGD to evolve the network in that specific direction, and the evolution is direct, the skull image emerging gradually but surely. In this way, the original Picbreeder image has gone through a series of "meaningful" ancestors which have left a tracee in the underlying representations while the sequence of images traversed by the SGD version are simply increasingly well-defined skull images. One of the things the authors note is that Picbreeder users tended to prefer symmetrical images which possibly explains why symmetry is explicitly encoded in the representations.

But does all this really matter? As long as the model performs as desired, why should we care that representations are messy and entangled? FER are detrimental for three key abilitiesreasons:
- *generalisation*, that is the ability to make good predictions in areas where training data is sparse. Good representations, which are modular and factored, can be used as a scaffold for filling in these gaps. WIthout these representations, interpolation cannot make use of the fundamental regularities these representations have captured. This is especially relevant at the frontiers of human knowledge where the expectations for what LLMs might contribute are the highest but where data coverage is sparser.
- *creativity*. Paradoxically, creativity or the ability to generate novel artefacts requires good representations, in particular of the generic class the new artefact is meant to belong to. Creativity does not function *ex nihilo* but builds upon past ideas which must be properly captured.
- *learning*. This ties in with what causes the difference in the two CPPNs. For a neural network, learning means adjusting the connection weights between neurons to achieve a certain ability, recognising cat images for instance. The way humans learn, and in a sense the way the Picbreeeder images evolve, is fundamentally sequential, as babies we learn how to babble, then say a few monosyllabic words, before chaining words together and finally holding conversations or delivering lectures. Similarly at school, we learn the basics of a subject before moving on to more advanced topics, e.g. counting comes before addition which comes before algebra, etc. This sequentiality means we absorb new information by building on top of previously acquired knowledge, we leverage prior representations to make new ones. This is not the case for LLMs which basically learn everything at once, in the same way that the skull image obtained by SGD emerged from scratch. This has consequences when you want an already-trained model to attain new abilities: rather than parsimoniously exploit past representations, tweaking connection weights here and there, the whole of the neural net has to be revised. For instance, recall how the parameter sweeps found a single connection weight that made the skull image wink. To produce a winking skull simply requires adjusting that parameter thanks to the efficient UFR representation, while the FER of the SGD image means a much larger, if not all, connection weights now have to be re-learnt.

Discussion point: maybe not helpful to think AI operates in terms of representations? Is this even always the case for us? For example learning a language through mastering grammar versus the innate spontaneous control that comes from growing up with a language. One neuron = one represeentation, why is that a good thing?
