---
title: 'PAPER REVIEW: Questioning Representational Optimism in Deep Learning: The Fractured Entangled Representation Hypothesis'
date: 2026-07-17
permalink: /posts/2026-07-17_Fractured-Entangled-Representations
tags:
  - Paper reviews
  - Artificial Intelligence
  - Evolution
---

(Version française plus bas)

# Introduction: What are Fractured Entangled Representations?

I discovered this frankly quite beautiful [preprint](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.11581) by listening to the excellent interview of its first and last authors, Akarsh Kumar and Kenneth Stanley respectively, on the Machine Learning Street Talk [podcast](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KKUKikuV58o). The central claim of this paper is that there exists a potential disconnect between an AI model's performance, its ability to achieve a benchmark, and the internal representations which are commonly assumed to underlie this ability. In particular, as AI models improve thanks to increased training data and compute, it is tempting to believe that key to this improvement is a parallel improvement in representations, a belief the authors dub ***representational optimism***. This is probably an anthropomorphic bias as introspection, for what it's worth, tells us that it is by better grasping appropriate concepts, better analysing problems, that we improve on cognitive tasks. This begs the question of what makes a representation "better" than another, and the authors provide a comprehensive answer: Representations, or concepts, are better if they are modular, non-overlapping, and meaningful. By contrast, an increasing number of studies suggest that modern models in fact rely on heuristics which are redundant and map onto fractured concepts. For instance, the authors point to the ability to add, which should be the same regardless of the objects being added, but which in practice, turns out to give different answers when asking GPT-3 to add stationary items or birds, suggesting that different mechanisms or representations of addition are being used in these two contexts. This example also highlights another undesirable aspect of these representations, instead of being modular so that they can be chained together and re-used in varying settings, they are entangled because in this case the ability to add is intertwined with the nature of the objects being added. Another given example is to ask ChatGPT-4o to generate images of either humans or chimps holding up a hand with an extra thumb, a task that is carried out correctly in the human case but not for the chimp in spite of the fact it is the same feature that is being added. Based on these two characteristics, these subpar representations are called here ***Fractured Entangled Representations*** (FER) that are opposed to ideal ***Unified Factored Representations*** (UFR). 

# Compositional Pattern Producing Networks

To illustrate the difference between FER and UFR and their presence in deep learning models, the authors use image-rendering neural networks called a **CPPN (Compositional Pattern Producing Network)** which takes as input each pixel of the image frame (its x and y coordinates and its distance from the centre of the image) and returns a colour vector for that same pixel. A complete image is thus generated by sweeping over all pixels and collecting the outputs of the CPPN. To properly appreciate the analogy the authors are making, it is important to understand that these neural networks generate a single image once their parameters are fixed (contrary to text-to-image generators), so that all the pixel positions can be thought of as the entire space of potential queries, making it possible to grasp the complete behaviour of the network. In addition, the output of any single neuron for all pixel positions can also be viewed as an image (but along a 1D colour gradient, for example red to blue or grayscale representing the neuron's activation level, rather than an RGB image) making it very easy to see precisely what each neuron contributes to the final outcome. These intermediate images are the internal representations of the network and the fact they are immediately available makes them far easier to interpret than the complex representations in most AI models. The study compares two different classes of CPPNs, based on how they were obtained. The first class comes from [Picbreeder](https://picbreeder.net/7338), an online artificial evolution experiment in which human users participated in the evolution of CPPNs by iteratively selecting images generated by different CPPNs which were used to create the next generation of images. Importantly, the website users are not given any particular goal, they simply choose images based on personal appeal. Because CPPNs have unconventional topologies, a "layerisation" step is required to transform them into standard **Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP)** which were computationally identical to the original CPPN. The second class of CPPNs was obtained by training an MLP from scratch to reproduce the output image of a Picbreeder-derived CPPN, using a standard training method, **stochastic gradient descent (SGD)**.

# Different Representations in CPPNs

The authors present three examples of images, a skull-like picture in the main text, and a butterfly and an apple which are in the supplementary material. Looking at the Picbreeder and the SGD versions of the different pictures, it is difficult to tell them apart as the latter are practically perfect copies of the original, in an analogous fashion to how the output of an LLM can convincingly pass as human. On the other hand, when we look at the internal representations, which are the intermediate images produced by every single neuron, we find very different structures between the two types of CPPNs. The Picbreeder CPPNs are quite parsimonious, for instance, the skull picture is generated by combining just 24 unique representations (some neurons in downstream layers are simply reproducing upstream representations identically, an artefact due to the layerisation step). Furthermore, these representations can be characterised as factored or modular, as different neurons represent separate meaningful features (such as symmetry along the y-axis which appears in the first layers of the network, or more detailed features like the overall skull shape, the eyes, and the mouth that are represented by neurons found more downstream). Another quality of these representations is that they can be manipulated without affecting other aspects of the picture, by adjusting individual weights connecting neurons. For instance, in the case of the skull image, the authors give the examples of four connection weights that separately control the opening of the mouth, winking of the eyes (left and right separately), eye width, and width of the jaw. Similarly, in the butterfly and apple examples in the supplementary material, they are able to identify weights which uniquely control the size of the wings or the angle of the stem. These qualities of parsimony, meaningfulness and modularity of representations, bear all the hallmarks of **UFR**. 

By contrast, the intermediate images, or representations, of the skull picture obtained through SGD are far less organised, with a much greater number of distinct representations used to obtain the skull picture, and with no obviously meaningful representation encoded by any neuron, the skull emerging unexpectedly in the final layer given the blurriness and chaos of prior representations. Indeed, when carrying out parameter sweeps to find connection weights that might control precise features in the image as before, the authors find that the image as a whole is blurred whenever a weight is tweaked. In the apple example, they were actually able to find a weight that controlled apple size, but this came at the cost of also changing the colour of the stem, capturing what is meant by entanglement. These representations can thus be qualified as FER, and the important thing to stress here, is that in spite of these weaker representations, the final skull picture is indeed identical to the original Picbreeder version, illustrating how an AI model can, at a superficial level, demonstrate excellent performance, while hiding very bad representations under the hood.

# Causes of FER

Why do the representations used by these two models differ so drastically? As has been briefly alluded, there are certain unique specificities of CPPNs, such as their topology and the activation functions of neurons which are potentially of different kinds within the same network, but the authors believe these are addressed by the layerisation step. This leaves the method by which the two classes of networks were obtained as the only plausible culprit. As previously explained, Picbreeder CPPNs are not trained to produce a particular pattern; instead, they are the result of multiple selection rounds by humans who choose pictures on purely subjective grounds. This is evident when tracing the phylogeny of these pictures: instead of a direct route to the skull, apple, or butterfly image, Picbreeder users explored the space of possible images in an open-ended, diverging manner. Contrary to this, the SGD-derived CPPNs were obtained by directly targeting the desired final image, and the phylogeny is direct, the skull image emerging gradually but surely. Consequently, the original Picbreeder skull image has gone through a rich series of "meaningful" ancestors which have left a trace in the underlying representations while the sequence of images traversed by the SGD version are just increasingly well-defined skull images. One of the things the authors note is that Picbreeder users tended to prefer symmetrical images which possibly explains why symmetry is explicitly encoded in the representations. The advantage of open-ended search over objective-maximising methods such as SGD is the topic of a [book](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Why-Greatness-Cannot-Planned-Objective/dp/3319155237?&linkCode=sl1&tag=mlst00-21&linkId=ef6366154109faa363e3d902197160ca&language=en_GB&ref_=as_li_ss_tl), "Why Greatness cannot be Planned", written by two of this paper's co-authors, Joel Lehman and Kenneth Stanley. However, SGD and other like methods have the considerable advantage of being prescriptive methods. If you know what you are looking for, you give yourself an objective towards which to train your model. Embracing open-ended search on the other hand, which is difficult to implement in the first place, would mean accepting that the end-result does not achieve the desired effect; but you might stumble on something cool along the way.  

# Impacts of FER

But does all this really matter? As long as the model performs as desired, why should we care that representations are messy and entangled? FERs negatively impact three key abilities:
- *generalisation*, that is the ability to make good predictions in areas where training data is sparse. Good representations, which are modular and factored, can be used as a scaffold for filling in these gaps. Without such representations, interpolation cannot use the fundamental and helpful regularities these representations would have captured. This is especially relevant at the frontiers of human knowledge where the expectations for what LLMs might contribute are probably the highest, but where training data is necessarily rarer.
- *creativity*. Paradoxically, creativity or the ability to generate novel artefacts requires good representations, in particular of the generic class the new artefact is meant to belong to. Creativity does not function *ex nihilo* but builds upon past ideas which must be properly captured. Even when crossing boundaries, for instance creating a new musical genre, artists must first master the rules of the previous style to understand where, how, and to what extent they can afford to go. Without good representations, creativity is synonymous with random chaos.
- *learning*. This ties in with what causes the difference in the two CPPNs. For a neural network, learning means adjusting the connection weights between neurons to achieve a certain ability such as recognising cat images. The way humans learn, and in a sense the way the Picbreeder images evolve, is fundamentally sequential: as babies, we learn to babble, then to say a few simple words, before chaining words into sentences and finally holding conversations or delivering lectures. Similarly at school, we learn the basics of a subject before moving on to more advanced topics, e.g. counting comes before addition which comes before algebra, etc. This sequentiality means we absorb new information by building on top of previously acquired knowledge, we leverage prior representations to make new ones. This is not the case for LLMs which learn the whole internet at once, so to speak, in the same way that the skull image obtained by SGD emerged from scratch instead of through a meandering exploration. This has consequences when you want an already-trained model to learn new abilities: rather than parsimoniously exploit past representations and tweaking just a handful of connection weights, the whole of the neural net has to be revised. For instance, recall how the parameter sweeps found a single connection weight that made the skull image wink; in this case, thanks to the efficiency of UFRs, to produce a winking skull requires adjusting that single parameter; on the other hand the FERs of the SGD-derived skull image mean a much larger number of, if not all, connection weights now have to be re-learnt.

----
