---
title: "Biological Mistakes: What They Are and What They Mean for the Experimental Biologist"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2023-01-01-mistakes
excerpt: 'This paper is a philosophical ingquiry into the nature of mistakes by biological entities.'
date: 2023-01-01
venue: 'The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science'
paperurl: 'https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/724444'
citation: 
---
Organisms and other biological entities are mistake-prone: they get things wrong. The entities ofpure physics, such as atoms and inorganic molecules, do not make mistakes: they do what theydo according to physical law, with no room for error except on the part of the physicist or theirtheory. We set out a novel framework for understanding biology and its demarcation from phys-ics—that of mistake-making. We distinguish biological mistakes from mere failures. We thenpropose a rigorous definition of mistakes that although invoking the concept of function, is com-patible with various views about what functions are. The definition of mistake-making is agential,since mistakes do not just happen—at least in the sense analysed here—but are made. This re-quires, then, a notion of biological agency that we set out as a definition of the minimal biologicalagent. The article then considers a series of objections to the theory presented here, along withour replies. Two key features of our theory of mistakes are, first, that it is a supplement to, not areplacement for, existing general frameworks within which biology is understood and practised.Second, it is designed to be experimentally productive. Hence we end with a series of case studieswhere mistake theory can be shown to be useful in the potential generation of research questionsand novel hypotheses of interest to the working biologist.
